docs/pages/docs/apis/access-control.mdx, before:

import { Markdown } from '../../../components/Markdown';

# Access Control API

The `access` property of the [list configuration](./schema) and [field configuration](./fields) objects configures who can query, create, update, and delete items in your Keystone system.

```typescript
import { config, createSchema, list } from '@keystone-next/keystone';
import { text } from '@keystone-next/keystone/fields';

export default config({
  lists: createSchema({
    ListKey: list({
      fields: {
        fieldName: text({ access: { /* ... */ }, }),
      },
      access: { /* ... */ },
    }),
  }),
});
```

!> This document covers the complete access control API.
Our [access control guide](../guides/access-control) shows you how to apply this API to common patterns.

## List Access Control

Keystone lets you apply access control on a per-list basis.
By default it allows all operations for all users.
Access control is applied to the generated CRUD (**c**reate, **r**ead, **u**pdate, **d**elete) operations and mutations in the [GraphQL API](./graphql), and is applied before any [hooks](./hooks) are executed.

List-level access control can be specified in three ways.

- `operation` access control lets you check the information in the `context` and `session` objects to decide if the
  user is allowed to access the list.
- `filter` access control lets you provide a GraphQL filter which defines the items the user is allowed to access.
- `item` access control lets you write a function which inspects the provided input data and the existing object (if it exists)
  and make a decision based on this extra data.

!> **Access denied:** **Mutations** return `null` data with an access denied error. **Queries** never return access denied errors, and instead treat items as if they didn't exist.

If access is **denied** due to any of the access control methods, the following responses will be returned from the GraphQL API:

- **Mutations**
  - **Single** operations return `null` and an access denied error.
  - **Multi** operations return a data array with `null` values for the items which have access denied.
    Error responses are returned for each `null` item.
- **Queries**
  - **Single** item queries return `null` with no errors.
  - **Many** item queries filter out items which have access denied. No error responses are returned.
  - **Count** queries will only count those items for which access is **not** denied. No error responses are returned.

### Operation

Operation-level access control lets you control whether which operations can be accessed by a user based on the `session` and `context`.
Individual functions can be provided for each of the operations.

!> These functions must return `true` if the operation is allowed, or `false` if it is not allowed.

```typescript
import { config, createSchema, list } from '@keystone-next/keystone';

export default config({
  lists: createSchema({
    ListKey: list({
      access: {
        operation: {
          query: ({ session, context, listKey, operation }) => true,
          create: ({ session, context, listKey, operation }) => true,
          update: ({ session, context, listKey, operation }) => true,
          delete: ({ session, context, listKey, operation }) => true,
        }
      },
    }),
  }),
});
```

?> The `query` access control rule is applied when running GraphQL query operations.
It does not prevent a user **reading** the data returned by the mutation operations.

### Filter

Filter-level access control lets you control which operations can be performed by providing a function which returns a GraphQL filter.

- For **mutations**, the access control filter will be combined with the unique identifier provided to the operation, and access will be denied if no item is found with this combined filter.
- For **queries**, the access control filter will be combined with the query filter and only items which match both filters will be returned.

In general, the filter access control functions will return GraphQL filters.
They can also return boolean values `true` or `false` to match or exclude all items.

```typescript
import { config, createSchema, list } from '@keystone-next/keystone';
import { checkbox } from '@keystone-next/keystone/fields';

export default config({
  lists: createSchema({
    ListKey: list({
      fields: {
        isReadable: checkbox(),
        isUpdatable: checkbox(),
        isDeletable: checkbox(),
      }
      access: {
        filter: {
          query: ({ session, context, listKey, operation }) => {
            return { isReadable: { equals: true } };
          },
          update: ({ session, context, listKey, operation }) => {
            return { isUpdatable: { equals: true } };
          },
          delete: ({ session, context, listKey, operation }) => {
            return { isDeletable: { equals: true } };
          },
        }
      },
    }),
  }),
});
```

!> Filter access control cannot be used on `create` operations, as there is no pre-existing item to filter against.

### Item (mutations only)

`item` is the final and most powerful level of access control.
It’s available to `create`, `update`, and `delete` mutations, and lets you write functions which have access to:

- the **input data** of the mutation (for `create` and `update` operations), and
- the **existing item** in the database (for `update` and `delete` operations).

!> These functions must return `true` if the operation is allowed, or `false` if it is not allowed.

```typescript
import { config, createSchema, list } from '@keystone-next/keystone';
import { checkbox } from '@keystone-next/keystone/fields';

export default config({
  lists: createSchema({
    ListKey: list({
      access: {
        item: {
          create: ({ session, context, listKey, operation, originalInput }) => true,
          update: ({ session, context, listKey, operation, originalInput, item }) => true,
          delete: ({ session, context, listKey, operation, item }) => true,
        }
      },
    }),
  }),
});
```

### Function Arguments

List-level access control functions are passed a collection of arguments which can be used to determine whether the operation is allowed.

| Argument        | Description                                                                                                   |
| --------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `session`       | The current session object. See the [Sessions API](./session) for details.                                    |
| `context`       | The [`KeystoneContext`](./context) object of the originating GraphQL operation.                               |
| `listKey`       | The key of the list being operated on.                                                                        |
| `operation`     | The operation being performed (`'query'`, `'create'`, `'update'`, `'delete'`).                                |
| `originalInput` | For `create` and `update` operations, this is the value of `data` passed into the mutation. (Item level only) |
| `item`          | The existing item being updated/deleted in `update` and `delete` operations. (Item level only)                |

## Field Access Control

Keystone also allows you to set up access control on a per-field basis.
Rules can be set for `read`, `update` and `delete`operations.

!> Each operation is defined by a function which returns `true` if access is allowed and `false` if access is not allowed.

### Mutations

Field-level access control rules are applied **after** the list level access rules have been applied.
Access control rules are only applied to the fields that have an input value provided to the mutation.
If any of the provided fields fail their access control check, the whole operation is aborted.
The GraphQL API then returns `null` along with an access denied error.

### Queries

Field-level access control rules are applied when trying to resolve a field on the output type.
If access is denied then the query will still return an item object, but the specific field will return `null`.
No errors will be returned for `read` access denied.

```typescript
import { config, createSchema, list } from '@keystone-next/keystone';
import { text } from '@keystone-next/keystone/fields';

export default config({
  lists: createSchema({
    ListKey: list({
      fields: {
        fieldName: text({
          access: {
            read: ({ session, context, listKey, fieldKey, operation, item }) => true,
            create: ({ session, context, listKey, fieldKey, operation, originalInput }) => true,
            update: ({ session, context, listKey, fieldKey, operation, originalInput, item }) => true,
          },
        }),
      },
    }),
  }),
});
```

!> Field-level access control is not available for `delete` operations.

### Function Arguments

Field-level access control functions are passed a collection of arguments which can be used to determine whether the operation is allowed.

| Argument        | Description                                                                                 |
| --------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `session`       | The current session object. See the [Sessions API](./session) for details.                  |
| `context`       | The [`KeystoneContext`](./context) object of the originating GraphQL operation.             |
| `listKey`       | The key of the list being operated on.                                                      |
| `fieldKey`      | The key of the field being operated on.                                                     |
| `operation`     | The operation being performed (`'read'`, `'create'`, `'update'`).                           |
| `originalInput` | For `create` and `update` operations, this is the value of `data` passed into the mutation. |
| `item`          | The existing item being read/updated in `read` and `update` operations.                     |

export default ({ children }) => <Markdown description="Complete reference docs for Keystone’s Access Control API. Configure who can read, create, update, and delete items in your Keystone system.">{children}</Markdown>;

Commit message:

Add item-level query note

docs/pages/docs/apis/access-control.mdx, after:

import { Markdown } from '../../../components/Markdown';

# Access Control API

The `access` property of the [list configuration](./schema) and [field configuration](./fields) objects configures who can query, create, update, and delete items in your Keystone system.

```typescript
import { config, createSchema, list } from '@keystone-next/keystone';
import { text } from '@keystone-next/keystone/fields';

export default config({
  lists: createSchema({
    ListKey: list({
      fields: {
        fieldName: text({ access: { /* ... */ }, }),
      },
      access: { /* ... */ },
    }),
  }),
});
```

!> This document covers the complete access control API.
Our [access control guide](../guides/access-control) shows you how to apply this API to common patterns.

## List Access Control

Keystone lets you apply access control on a per-list basis.
By default it allows all operations for all users.
Access control is applied to the generated CRUD (**c**reate, **r**ead, **u**pdate, **d**elete) operations and mutations in the [GraphQL API](./graphql), and is applied before any [hooks](./hooks) are executed.

List-level access control can be specified in three ways.

- `operation` access control lets you check the information in the `context` and `session` objects to decide if the
  user is allowed to access the list.
- `filter` access control lets you provide a GraphQL filter which defines the items the user is allowed to access.
- `item` access control lets you write a function which inspects the provided input data and the existing object (if it exists)
  and make a decision based on this extra data.

!> **Access denied:** **Mutations** return `null` data with an access denied error. **Queries** never return access denied errors, and instead treat items as if they didn't exist.

If access is **denied** due to any of the access control methods, the following responses will be returned from the GraphQL API:

- **Mutations**
  - **Single** operations return `null` and an access denied error.
  - **Multi** operations return a data array with `null` values for the items which have access denied.
    Error responses are returned for each `null` item.
- **Queries**
  - **Single** item queries return `null` with no errors.
  - **Many** item queries filter out items which have access denied. No error responses are returned.
  - **Count** queries will only count those items for which access is **not** denied. No error responses are returned.

### Operation

Operation-level access control lets you control whether which operations can be accessed by a user based on the `session` and `context`.
Individual functions can be provided for each of the operations.

!> These functions must return `true` if the operation is allowed, or `false` if it is not allowed.

```typescript
import { config, createSchema, list } from '@keystone-next/keystone';

export default config({
  lists: createSchema({
    ListKey: list({
      access: {
        operation: {
          query: ({ session, context, listKey, operation }) => true,
          create: ({ session, context, listKey, operation }) => true,
          update: ({ session, context, listKey, operation }) => true,
          delete: ({ session, context, listKey, operation }) => true,
        }
      },
    }),
  }),
});
```

?> The `query` access control rule is applied when running GraphQL query operations.
It does not prevent a user **reading** the data returned by the mutation operations.

### Filter

Filter-level access control lets you control which operations can be performed by providing a function which returns a GraphQL filter.

- For **mutations**, the access control filter will be combined with the unique identifier provided to the operation, and access will be denied if no item is found with this combined filter.
- For **queries**, the access control filter will be combined with the query filter and only items which match both filters will be returned.

In general, the filter access control functions will return GraphQL filters.
They can also return boolean values `true` or `false` to match or exclude all items.

```typescript
import { config, createSchema, list } from '@keystone-next/keystone';
import { checkbox } from '@keystone-next/keystone/fields';

export default config({
  lists: createSchema({
    ListKey: list({
      fields: {
        isReadable: checkbox(),
        isUpdatable: checkbox(),
        isDeletable: checkbox(),
      }
      access: {
        filter: {
          query: ({ session, context, listKey, operation }) => {
            return { isReadable: { equals: true } };
          },
          update: ({ session, context, listKey, operation }) => {
            return { isUpdatable: { equals: true } };
          },
          delete: ({ session, context, listKey, operation }) => {
            return { isDeletable: { equals: true } };
          },
        }
      },
    }),
  }),
});
```

!> Filter access control cannot be used on `create` operations, as there is no pre-existing item to filter against.

### Item (mutations only)

`item` is the final and most powerful level of access control.
It’s available to `create`, `update`, and `delete` mutations, and lets you write functions which have access to:

- the **input data** of the mutation (for `create` and `update` operations), and
- the **existing item** in the database (for `update` and `delete` operations).

!> These functions must return `true` if the operation is allowed, or `false` if it is not allowed.

```typescript
import { config, createSchema, list } from '@keystone-next/keystone';
import { checkbox } from '@keystone-next/keystone/fields';

export default config({
  lists: createSchema({
    ListKey: list({
      access: {
        item: {
          create: ({ session, context, listKey, operation, originalInput }) => true,
          update: ({ session, context, listKey, operation, originalInput, item }) => true,
          delete: ({ session, context, listKey, operation, item }) => true,
        }
      },
    }),
  }),
});
```

?> Item-level access control is not available for `query` operations.
Applying access control after fetching items would lead to inconsistent pagination behaviour and incorrect `count` results.

### Function Arguments

List-level access control functions are passed a collection of arguments which can be used to determine whether the operation is allowed.

| Argument        | Description                                                                                                   |
| --------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `session`       | The current session object. See the [Sessions API](./session) for details.                                    |
| `context`       | The [`KeystoneContext`](./context) object of the originating GraphQL operation.                               |
| `listKey`       | The key of the list being operated on.                                                                        |
| `operation`     | The operation being performed (`'query'`, `'create'`, `'update'`, `'delete'`).                                |
| `originalInput` | For `create` and `update` operations, this is the value of `data` passed into the mutation. (Item level only) |
| `item`          | The existing item being updated/deleted in `update` and `delete` operations. (Item level only)                |

## Field Access Control

Keystone also allows you to set up access control on a per-field basis.
Rules can be set for `read`, `update` and `delete`operations.

!> Each operation is defined by a function which returns `true` if access is allowed and `false` if access is not allowed.

### Mutations

Field-level access control rules are applied **after** the list level access rules have been applied.
Access control rules are only applied to the fields that have an input value provided to the mutation.
If any of the provided fields fail their access control check, the whole operation is aborted.
The GraphQL API then returns `null` along with an access denied error.

### Queries

Field-level access control rules are applied when trying to resolve a field on the output type.
If access is denied then the query will still return an item object, but the specific field will return `null`.
No errors will be returned for `read` access denied.

```typescript
import { config, createSchema, list } from '@keystone-next/keystone';
import { text } from '@keystone-next/keystone/fields';

export default config({
  lists: createSchema({
    ListKey: list({
      fields: {
        fieldName: text({
          access: {
            read: ({ session, context, listKey, fieldKey, operation, item }) => true,
            create: ({ session, context, listKey, fieldKey, operation, originalInput }) => true,
            update: ({ session, context, listKey, fieldKey, operation, originalInput, item }) => true,
          },
        }),
      },
    }),
  }),
});
```

!> Field-level access control is not available for `delete` operations.

### Function Arguments

Field-level access control functions are passed a collection of arguments which can be used to determine whether the operation is allowed.

| Argument        | Description                                                                                 |
| --------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `session`       | The current session object. See the [Sessions API](./session) for details.                  |
| `context`       | The [`KeystoneContext`](./context) object of the originating GraphQL operation.             |
| `listKey`       | The key of the list being operated on.                                                      |
| `fieldKey`      | The key of the field being operated on.                                                     |
| `operation`     | The operation being performed (`'read'`, `'create'`, `'update'`).                           |
| `originalInput` | For `create` and `update` operations, this is the value of `data` passed into the mutation. |
| `item`          | The existing item being read/updated in `read` and `update` operations.                     |

export default ({ children }) => <Markdown description="Complete reference docs for Keystone’s Access Control API. Configure who can read, create, update, and delete items in your Keystone system.">{children}</Markdown>;
